the 25th of February. 23rd. I'm 23rd. I'm sitting
in room 361 of the Hal Booty building with Tony
Ganji. Tony, try your mic. I'm going to try it. Is it
working?
Tony, to introduce you to anyone who may read the
transcript of this or hear this tape in years after
this, describe your background and experience
before you came to A&M. Where did you grow up? Where
did you go to school? Where had you taught and so
forth? OK, I was born and raised in Newark, New
Jersey. Went through high school at Newark, New
Jersey. That was in 1946 I graduated. Went into the
Army, mostly to get the GI Bill, which I got. And
when I got out of the service in 1948, the folks had
moved to California, Southern California. And so
I went to UCLA using my GI Bill and started off as an
electrical engineering major. And because of the
rigidity there was in selecting classes for
electrical engineering majors at that time, I
decided being an electrical engineer was not what
I wanted to do. So I went over to the physics
department and became a physics major. And when I
got my degree after more than the four years,
because I was working all the time, as well as the GI
Bill, I was working all the time to work my way
through college. And so I ended up graduating with
165 credit hours rather than the usual 120. But
nevertheless, when I graduated, Ken McKenzie of
the physics department invited me to be a teaching
assistant. And I took him up on it, became a
graduate teaching assistant, and finished
getting a master's and PhD at UCLA. Officially got
the PhD in 1960. I officially graduated with a
bachelor's degree from UCLA in 1952,
got the master's degree in 1953, and officially
the PhD in 1960, although I had finished up in 1959.
It was a question of writing the dissertation and
getting it approved. I went to work for Space
General, or it was Space Electronics, it was
called at that time. It was a company run by Jim
Fletcher, who later became the president of the
University of Utah, and Frank Leehan, who later
became Secretary of Transportation in Johnson's
administration. And we worked on weapons
systems, communications, self-focusing
antenna arrays, underground communication,
side-looking radar, synthetic aperture radar,
and a lot of those things. And I found it very
interesting. The only problem was I was always
working on war machines. And I figured I didn't
spend all those years going to school to be working
on war machines or things like that. So I decided to
leave and go back to the academia. I was fortunate
enough to get a position at MIT in their geology and
geophysics department. I spent three years
there. That was in 1964 through 67. And got to meet
some very fine people. Ray Hyde, who is now at the
British Meteorological Office. I suppose he's
retired by now. Nafi Toxos, who's still at MIT. And
Frank Press became department head. There were
really a bunch of super people. Ted Madden is
another one who probably retired by now. And
anyway, in 67, I then came to A&M, and the
geophysics department was just starting. So I
think I was the fourth member, or actually tied for
third and fourth. Dave Falk was the first
geophysicist at that time. There had been a
geophysicist before then. It was Pete Dellinger
and Joe Berg were geophysicists in the early 60s or
even in the 50s. But they left and went to Oregon
State. And then Dave Falkwas came in 1962. They
started the College of Geoscience and brought in
Horace Byers, I think, in 1966. Terry Spencer came
in as the head of geophysics. So he and Dave Falkwas
were... the two members of the geophysics
department. And then in 1957, Bob Unterberger and
I were both hired. 1967. you said 57 oh yes 67 oh yes
right right in 67. now actually i must admit that at
the same time john handen came and john handen was
sort of considered part of the uh geophysics as
well as george sowers who was also part of the
center for tectonal physics and he was part of
geophysics and i believe john logan also so it was a
time of rapid growth as far as you know Whose idea
was it that geophysics would get emphasized here
and that there would be a real first rate program in
geophysics? I really don't know. I think it was
Horace Byers or Earl Cook had a big influence on it
too, but I suspect that may have come on down either
from higher up yet than Connolly or Lyndon Johnson
or I doubt Rutter thought so because he just wasn't
knowledgeable about geophysics. But I think both
Connolly and Johnson were well enough aware of the
oil industry to recognize that geophysics was
important as well as geology because there's
always been a very strong geology and petroleum
engineering program at Texas A&M for a long time.
How did someone identify you? Who was it and what
were the recruiting techniques they used to
attract you? Well, the thing they'd used to track
me was money. They gave me a good salary. Actually,
no, that's a joke. Who was the person that
contacted me? I think it might have been Earl Cook
and Terry Spencer. Do you have any idea who it was
that recommended your name to them? It might have
been my thesis advisor, Leon Lopoff, and it might
have been Freeman Gilbert from the University of
California, San Diego. But actually, I don't
know. There were a number of schools that I
interviewed at that time. I interviewed at Penn
State and Oregon State and Utah also. And I liked
A&M best because it seemed like they had the best
chance for growth. Describe your impression of
A&M at that time? Well, it was in pretty bad shape.
It clearly had a lot of room for growth. When I came
on in and first talked to Terry Spencer John
handed, they were in what's now called the Howe
Booty building and it was undergoing renovation
and so there were things being repaired all around
us. Air conditioning ducts were being put in and so
it was really in a pretty bad state of repair. But it
was clear that there was a plan to do something
about it. It was in the process of being developed.
And so consequently, that impressed me. And also
the people, Earl Cook, John Hand, and Terry
Spencer, they're all people who sort of really
felt like, and also Horace Byers, who felt like the
geophysics was important. And they wanted the
geophysics program to be an important program.
And I felt like I contributed something, and so I
came. Describe those three men buyers cook and
Spencer describe them at that time. What were
their responsibilities and their background.
Okay. Byers was the dean of the College of
Geosciences. He was, I forgot, he came from
Chicago or someplace like that, but I really
wasn't sure. And he was a very quiet person, but at
the same time a very dynamic and strong person. He
had his own opinions, and he was very firm about his
opinions. He also had some very good ideas, but it
was not a real, it didn't, appear to be a pusher
although he was certainly a guy who could do things
and got things done. Earl Cook on the other hand was
much more dynamic guy. He was interested in many
different things. He liked to talk and talked very
well, carried on an excellent conversation. He
was a geologist and geographer and so he was really
sort of a natural philosopher type more than
anything else. Terry Spencer On the other hand, he
was also a very quiet guy. He was department head?
Oh, yes, right. Earl Cook was the associate dean, I
believe. Terry Spencer was the department head.
That's correct. And he had come from Chevron. And
before that, Chevron Research in La Habra. And
before that, he had been at Caltech. He got his
degree from Caltech under Hewitt Dix, who was one
of the very famous guys in geophysics from
Caltech. Terry had done some nice work at that
time. He was a very quiet, very nice, very pleasant
guy. I also felt that he was somebody who would get
things done. What promises were made to you when
you were employed, when you were attracted here?
Well, actually, the promises that were made to me
was that I would be able to work hard and do
something. And I was pretty clear that I had a free
hand, that I was on the ground floor, so to speak.
There weren't a bunch of old faculty members
around who were going to say, this is what you could
do, this is what you couldn't do, and this is how we
did it in the past. We were starting from scratch.
There had been no geophysics department prior to
that, so it was the beginning of the geophysics
department. I felt that it was a real growth
opportunity. It was a place where I could make some
impact. I thought the impact I would make was more
than I actually did make, but nevertheless, the
potential appeared to be there. What salary did
they, we're not going to talk money except on this,
what salary was the beginning salary? The
beginning salary wasn't too good as I recall. It
was I think about $16,000 for the full year. It was
less than the guys from from people who went to the
Center for Tectonal Physics. It was still less
than what I had earned at Space General before I
left Space General and went to MIT. And when I left
Space General and went to MIT, I took a 25% cut in
salary to go there. But money has never been the
most important thing in my life anyway, so it was a
wage in which I could live on. It was certainly a
valid salary. Did they make any commitment about
research funding? Yes, they did, as a matter of
fact. And they gave me some research funds. They
gave me money to, well, actually, I guess it was
more teaching research. My teaching and my
research have always been very closely related.
And I was given funds to set up a laboratory that I
used in the teaching of the seismology course that
I taught. And so we went out and we bought some
equipment a digital oscilloscope and parts and
various electronic parts. I was pretty well
versed in electronics, then still am for that
matter. The other thing they did is they gave me a
small allotment of money to build a laser strain
meter. because I had built a laser strain meter at
MIT, which I had set up and got working. I did build a
laser strain meter, but never really ever got it
set up here at A&M because conditions never seemed
to be right to do it. But that was about it. Now, from
what you have said so far, it seems that the
recruitment of the geophysics faculty were from
the big league institutions in geophysics?
Actually, they weren't. Other than myself, who,
well, see, Dave Falk was from Woods Hole, that's
true, but Terry Spencer was from Chevron. Now, if
you say where they had graduated. No, that's what I
mean. Oh, okay. Yes, right. And Bob Unterberger,
too, for that matter, was from UCLA. John Handen
was from UCLA. But Unterberger also was from
Chevron, Chevron Research. And Handen and his
crew were from Shell down in Houston. But, let's
see, Mal Friedman got his Ph.D. at Rice. Oh, you
know about Mal Friedman, right? He walked across
the stage either immediately before me or
immediately after me when we got our Ph.D.s. I'll
be darned. That's fantastic. Okay. Because there
was a joke made when they read off the titles of the
dissertations. Yes. And since mine in history...
about the presbyterian church in the south during
the civil war was fairly easy for anybody to
understand right they said and thankfully his
dissertation is entitled and when i got off the
stage friedman kind of gouged me and teased me
about it i see um you you uh you people had big league
institutional backgrounds and also it seems that
there was a kind of a common thread of real-world
research space and petroleum and or petroleum
related did that seem to you to be the appropriate
combination for this department at this
institution Yes, not only for this department or
this institute, I think for any department or any
institution, I think having some practical
experience is tremendously valuable. It gives
you a chance to get away from academia and to maybe
get yourself weaned a little bit so that you get a
little more mature and start working on it. Bob
Berg, who was the head of the geology department,
he was also in the oil industry for a good while
before he became the head here, I think also in 1966
or something like that. Describe, if you can,
getting settled in and getting started that first
semester on this new campus in this new town. Oh,
well, it wasn't too bad, actually. I looked
around. There were quite a few houses available in
town, some very nice ones. I bought a nice house. I
think I paid $25,000 for it at the time. A
four-bedroom, two-story house, brand new. My
wife liked it very much. She kept telling me I
should have bought a much bigger house, and she was
right. I should have bought a bigger house. I'm
still living in that same house, by the way, over 30
years later. and there were a number of houses that
were available in the general area eventually
ended up about two miles away from the school so
that was pretty easy there were a lot of stuff going
on has he not only in the Enchano Meadows where I
bought but also Don Cain had been doing stuff in the
Oaks over there off 29th Street there was There
wasn't as much activity going on in College
Station as I recall. It was mostly in Bryan, close
to Rosemary and that Stillmeadow area there.
Getting settled into the university itself
wasn't too bad. And
it wasn't too hard, either, because of the fact
that the courses that I ended up teaching here were
ones that I had already taught at MIT. So I had a
bunch of notes already. So it wasn't like I had to
spend a lot of time preparing a bunch of new notes.
But I've always spent time, however, working on
the notes because the courses are never constant.
They're always in flux, and you're always doing
something. But I spent a good bit of time at that,
and I kind of enjoyed it. I got involved with the
people at the Center for Tectonal Physics. I
thought that was very interesting because they
were doing, again, practical work and doing
experimental work as a theoretician type. and
electronics type, both, I kind of enjoyed what
they were doing. did can you share any stories
recollections of what it was like for a youngster
from New Jersey then California to learn how to get
along in Texas surely there must have been some
times when somebody didn't understand you
accused you of being from somewhere else well the
answer to that is I never did learn No, I'm joking.
No, I never really had any serious problems about
it. The Texans are really very nice people.
They've always been very kind and they've always
recognized that I was a Yankee and therefore they
expected a certain kind of deviant behavior from
me and a different kind of manners and style. I
don't think they ever really resented it. They
would let me know, however, that their behavior
was a little different and should be a little
different here, but they always did it by their
example, never by telling me, hey, that's wrong,
don't do it that way, but by the way in which they
would behave. I learned to really calm down a good
bit more and be a little gentler and a little more
Texan, and it's been a good thing for me in my life.
Did you ever have any goofs on mispronouncing the
name of this county or some other town around here?
Not this county, but I've always had a problem with
Mejia and Tyvola and which I now know you know but
yeah those were always very interesting and But I
was kind of used to that a little bit, too, because
I'd spent 17 years in California after I got out of
high school, after I got out of the service. And of
course, it had the Spanish influence there. So you
had San Jose and Tijuana. So it was not
unreasonable to have things pronounced
differently than which they were spelled. Let's
see. either as a friend or in any other capacity
attempt to give you guidance as to what some rules
were at A&M, either written or unwritten?
No, I don't think so. Well, the written rules, I was
told about the written rules in that there was a
policy and procedure manual. I was expected to
read it, I found out most of the rules by the hard
way, by butting my head up against it. One of the
things I really felt very bad about when I came here
is that I had this research money to buy equipment
with, and so I went on down to the purchasing
department and said, this is the stuff I want to
order. And they said, well, you can't order that.
You have to go through the submitting procedure
and so forth and so on. And, of course, it was really
kind of hard for me to understand. It was made clear
to me that this was to prevent dishonesty or
something. I think that's what it went. And I got
very resentful about that because I thought I
lived in the United States where you were innocent
until proven guilty, but apparently as far as
financial disbursements are concerned, you're
guilty until you're proven innocent. That took a
little while to learn how to do that, but
eventually I learned, yeah. Now, how did the
department operate in terms of decision making in
those early years? It was mostly the department
decisions were made in the meetings, as far as I can
tell. I don't know. what went on when I wasn't
there. But in the meetings, we sat around and we
talked about what the courses should be, what the
curriculum should be, how we should go about
recruiting students, and what kind of students we
wanted, and so forth and so on. We had one of the very
first programs of active student recruitment, I
think, at Texas A&M. where we sent out a bunch of
letters to national merit or SAT score people, and
we offered them scholarships to those who had done
well in the science part of it. And we had a large
number of excellent students, because for one
thing, we could give them a very small
scholarship, and that would make them eligible
for in-state tuition, which was a big difference
in the tuition. And most of these kids have found
that most of the students who are just graduating
from high school didn't know what they wanted to
do. And so if anybody showed any interest
whatsoever in them, about saying, hey, you've got
a talent for doing such and such. Why don't you try
doing that? We did that. So we had this very strong
program. We ended up with really some of the best
students on campus in the geophysics department.
They were so good that everybody was trying to
steal them from us. And they did very
successfully, which was all right. We didn't
really mind. But we had a bunch of good ones. So most
of the decisions were made in the department
meetings, and they were mostly decisions about
academic matters, you know, courses. The
students here, how did they compare with the
students you had known at other institutions in
terms of quality? Our undergraduates were very,
very good. I think they were probably as good as the
ones that are at UCLA. The graduate students
weren't quite as good. However, I will say that the
best graduate students we had were every bit as
good as the graduate students at MIT. But at MIT,
they were all tremendous. Whereas here, the best
ones were as good as that, and then they would tail
off quite a bit. The undergraduates were, we had a
good strong bunch in there because of this
recruiting program and it was surprisingly
because of the the scholarship thing and the
tuition waiver for out-of-state. A lot of them
were from out-of-state. A lot of the students were
from out-of-state. And so they were quite
excellent. Of course, we had some students from
in-state that were excellent, too. But really, I
say overall, the better students came from
out-of-state. The source of that scholarship
money, what was it? The oil company. We had set up a
program. We had talked about this in the
department meeting. It was my feeling, too. Look,
we're here in Texas. And at that time, the oil
industry was really the big industry in Texas. And
we're geophysicists. Well, if we don't cater to
the oil industry or train our students to be able to
get jobs in the oil industry, well, we're just not
meeting our obligation as a state university. And
that was an obligation that I felt. And I think most
of the other faculty agreed. And we've always had a
curriculum that was very applied geophysics
oriented. We have done some things in global
geophysics. But the major part of it has been in
exploration geophysics, certainly at the
undergraduate level and at the master's level.
When you get to the PhD level, why then the problems
almost have to be more global than exploration. So
because of that, having very good students, and
the oil companies were looking for good students,
they would come and they would recruit. And so
whenever they came and recruited, we said, look
it, you want good students? We can get good
students, but we need money. Give us the money and
we'll get good students. You're not doing us any
favors by giving us the money. Well, they really
were, of course, because we were getting better
students. I said, you know, because you're just
making more work for us, right? I said, but if you do
that, why, then we'll have good quality students
when you come here to recruit. And they were very,
very generous in that regard. Are there some oil
companies that deserve special mention that were
more generous? Yeah, let's see. I believe Amoco
was one of them that was really very active. And
Phillips Petroleum was also a good one. And Shell
was very helpful. The others were also helpful,
but not quite as much. But those people were very,
very active. As a matter of fact, Gary Servos of
Amoco would come and actually set up seismic
chutes in the area for the students and things of
that sort. It was really tremendous. In the late
60s and early 70s, for geosciences undergraduate
students, what were the tough courses, either
within the department or outside, that were kind
of the gateway courses? Well,
for our students there weren't many tough courses
in the first two years and part of the problem there
was that we didn't have any geophysics courses in
the first two years because they were all taking
the chemistry, physics, and math that We felt that
a geophysicist, as well as geology. We had some
good, tough geology courses that they were
teaching them. And as a matter of fact, that was one
thing that we had to do something about because we
hardly got to see our students until they were
juniors. And by that time, they were being stolen
away from us because all these other people had
seen them and saw what great students they were.
They recruited them for their department. So we
set up some courses. at the freshman level and the
sophomore level, for the geophysics majors. They
were solid courses, but we weren't trying to do any
weeding. We were trying to do some retention.
Actually, we never did any real weeding in trying
to do that. If there was any attrition, the
attrition was natural by the chemistry, the
physics, and the math courses, which are tough
courses. They would compete with the physicists,
mathematicians, and the engineers. Let's make
believe you were an undergraduate advisor in that
period. What courses, if a student came in for
advice, what freshman and sophomore courses did
you look at most carefully to see how they had done?
Oh, I looked at their math and physics courses.
Math and physics. Oh, yes, primarily. And also
their English course that they took as well,
because that's one of the things that we found at
that time, and it's still true, it's even more true
now, is that the greatest training these kids
needed was in communication. And being
geophysicists, they weren't really scientists
in the pure scientist sense. These were guys who
were going to be applied scientists. And as
applied scientists, therefore, they had to
communicate. And furthermore, if they were going
to go into the oil business, what they were
supposed to do was work up a prospect and make a
convincing story to management that this
prospect was a good one, that they should drill it,
and so forth and so on. So communications was very
important. So very early in the game, we looked at
their English grades. In those early years, how
adequate were the classrooms and laboratory
facilities for teaching and research in
geophysics? The ones that were in our department
were fine. It was really not very difficult. There
weren't very many students, though, because at
the peak, I think we had maybe 30 students in a
class. So it was always a small program. And given
that the program is that small, you've got 15 kids
in a class, there's no way that you can do anything
but a quality program. You really would have to be a
bad teacher not to do a good job with that few
students, especially when they were very bright
students, which is what they were. What was the
normal workload for you in terms of hours to teach
per semester during those early years? I
generally taught two courses per semester. And
sometimes I would do three, but the third one would
be a seminar or something like that, which really
didn't take a lot of time and effort. Later on, I
taught more. But the teaching load has always been
very, very light in geophysics. The idea was that
we were supposed to, they expected us to do
research. They expected us to get research
grants. They expected us to have graduate
students, because you supported the graduate
students with research grants and so forth and so
on. And so there was that. So the teaching load, I
think, was quite light, my personal opinion. And
within the department, were good standards set in
those early years for the faculty in terms of
promotion and tenure and so forth? Oh, I think so. I
remember I had to make a big deal and threaten to
leave in order to get my promotion, but I got it. I
wasn't too old. I think I was 40 years old or
something like that. So I guess if I hadn't
threatened, I probably would have gotten it in the
next year.